APPS-1271 Update improve manifest docs (#354)
dnanexus/dxCompiler: doc/ExpertOptions.md

# Manifests

In extreme cases, running compiled workflows can fail due to DNAnexus platform limits on the total size of the input and 
output JSON documents of a job. An example is a task with many inputs/outputs that is called in scatter over a large collection. 
In such a case, you can enable manifest support at compile time with the `-useManifests` option. 
This option causes each generated applet or workflow to accept inputs as a manifest, and to produce outputs as a manifest.

A manifest is a JSON document that contains all the inputs/outputs that would otherwise be passed directly to/from the 
workflow stage. A manifest can be specified in one of two ways: 

> 1. A `.json` input file (see `Manifest JSON`). Here, when the workflow is **compiled** with `-inputs mymanifest.json`, a new 

Reviewer: In this case invoking
```suggestion
1. A `.json` input file (see [Manifest JSON](#manifest-json)) is the recommended way to provide inputs in the manifest format.  `java -jar dxCompiler.jar -inputs mymanifest.json` will produce `mymanifest.dx.json` that can be passed to `dx run`.
```

Reviewer: For my education, 1 ends up creating a json file with a  `input_manifest___` field and 2 is passed as input_manifest_files___ argument?

Author: I like your version more.
Re: question - yes this is for the [situation #1](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L1511)
This is for the [situation #2](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L1540)
Both are in the text

file `mymanifest.dx.json` will be generated locally. This is a recommended way to provide inputs in the manifest format.

> 2. A `file-xxx` input, where the file must exist on the platform (see `Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs`). A 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. A platform `file-xxx` with content described in  `Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs` section can be used to pass manifest output from a stage of one workflow (including the `output` stage) as input to another workflow. 
```

typical use case for this scenario is when a user wants to pass manifest output file from a stage (including `output` stage) 
directly to a new workflow. Also, this scenario might be useful when debugging individual stages of a failing workflow.

## Manifest JSON

> When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_mainfest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 

Reviewer: please add a small example to https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/tree/develop/contrib, verify that it runs and reference it in the docs

Author: an example of a manifest in a JSON format is in the text: https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L1478
Evidence of a successful run: `project-Fy9QqgQ0yzZbg9KXKP4Jz6Yq:analysis-GFBqG8j0yzZbjGyp159b46VK`

> accepts a JSON document as a string or as a `.json` file. For example, given the following workflow:

Reviewer: I though dnanexus applets input of type hash expects a json hash.    Could you give me an example of passing 1. json document as a string 2. .json file

Author: From the `dx run` documentation: 
```
-f FILENAME, --input-json-file FILENAME
                        Load input JSON from FILENAME ("-" to use stdin)
```
example of the json file is in the text (referenced in another comment). Successful run with `.json` file (document) - `project-Fy9QqgQ0yzZbg9KXKP4Jz6Yqanalysis-GFBqG8j0yzZbjGyp159b46VK`.
With `cat mymanifest.dx.json | dx run workflow-xxx -f -`: `project-Fy9QqgQ0yzZbg9KXKP4Jz6Yq:analysis-GFBqgQj0yzZb76p69f7qFkZB`

# Manifests

In extreme cases, running compiled workflows can fail due to DNAnexus platform limits on the total size of the input and 
output JSON documents of a job. An example is a task with many inputs/outputs that is called in scatter over a large collection. 
In such a case, you can enable manifest support at compile time with the `-useManifests` option. 
This option causes each generated applet or workflow to accept inputs as a manifest, and to produce outputs as a manifest.

> A manifest is a JSON document that contains all the inputs/outputs that would otherwise be passed directly to/from the 

Reviewer: I though some applets take arrays of manifests as input. output consists of a single manifest.

Author: Maybe, but seems like a corner case to me. And it does not contradict anything from above.

workflow stage. A manifest can be specified in one of two ways: 
1. A `.json` input file (see [Manifest JSON](#manifest-json)) is the recommended way to provide inputs in the manifest format.  

> `java -jar dxCompiler.jar -inputs mymanifest.json` will produce `mymanifest.dx.json` that can be passed to `dx run`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`java -jar dxCompiler.jar -inputs mymanifest.json` will produce `mymanifest.dx.json` that can be passed to `dx run -f mymanifest.dx.json`.
```

> This is a recommended way to provide inputs in the manifest format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the recommended way to provide inputs in manifest format.
```

2. A platform `file-xxx` with content described in  [Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs](#intermediate-manifest-file-inputs/outputs) 
section can be used to pass manifest output from a stage of one workflow (including the `output` stage) as input to another workflow.  A 
typical use case for this scenario is when a user wants to pass manifest output file from a stage (including `output` stage) 
directly to a new workflow. Also, this scenario might be useful when debugging individual stages of a failing workflow.

## Manifest JSON

> When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_mainfest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_mainfest___` input field of type `hash`.```

Author: I don't understand the suggestion

> When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_mainfest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_manifest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 
```

> When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_mainfest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_manifest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 
```

> accepts a JSON document as a string or as a `.json` file. For example, given the following workflow:

Reviewer: applet accepts multiple inputs.  one of them is `input_manifest___` input.  `dx` allows to specify all of applet inputs from a json fine with `-f` or from json string with `-j` or via individual inputs with `-i`.   I don't think we need to repeat all the ways in which `dx run` allows to specify input.

Author: Sure, but I see no contradiction here. This paragraph (introduced before this ticket) only means that all created applets have `input_mainfest___` in the input spec instead of actual inputs. This paragraph does not touch upon how the inputs are actually passed to those applets when they are executed.

> accepts a JSON document as a string or as a `.json` file. For example, given the following workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, given the following workflow:
```

```wdl

> workflow test {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version 1.1

task t1 {
  input {
    File f
  }
  command <<<
    echo "t1: "  >>out
    cat "~{f}" >>out
  >>>
  output {
     File t1_out = "out"
  }
}

workflow test {
  input {
    String s
    File f
  }
  call t1 {    input:      f = f  }
  output {
    File wf_out = t1.t1_out
  }
}
```

# Manifests

In extreme cases, running compiled workflows can fail due to DNAnexus platform limits on the total size of the input and 
output JSON documents of a job. An example is a task with many inputs/outputs that is called in scatter over a large collection. 
In such a case, you can enable manifest support at compile time with the `-useManifests` option. 

> This option causes each generated applet or workflow to accept inputs as a manifest, and to produce outputs as a manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option causes each generated applet or workflow to accept inputs as an array of manifests, and to produce outputs as a single manifest.
```

This is the recommended way to provide inputs in manifest format.
2. A platform `file-xxx` with content described in  [Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs](#intermediate-manifest-file-inputs/outputs) 
section can be used to pass manifest output from a stage of one workflow (including the `output` stage) as input to another workflow.  A 
typical use case for this scenario is when a user wants to pass manifest output file from a stage (including `output` stage) 
directly to a new workflow. Also, this scenario might be useful when debugging individual stages of a failing workflow.

## Manifest JSON

When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_manifest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 
accepts a JSON document as a string or as a `.json` file. For example, given the following workflow:

```wdl
version 1.1

task t1 {
  input {
    File f
  }
  command <<<
    echo "t1: "  >>out
    cat "~{f}" >>out
  >>>
  output {
     File t1_out = "out"
  }
}

workflow test {
  input {
    String s
    File f
  }
  call t1 {    input:      f = f  }
  output {
    File wf_out = t1.t1_out
  }
}

>   input {

Reviewer: I think the next few lines should be removed

# Manifests

> In extreme cases, running compiled workflows can fail due to DNAnexus platform limits on the total size of the input and 
> output JSON documents of a job. An example is a task with many inputs/outputs that is called in scatter over a large collection. 
> In such a case, you can enable manifest support at compile time with the `-useManifests` option. 
> This option causes each generated applet or workflow to accept inputs as an array of manifests, and to produce outputs as a single manifest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In extreme cases, running compiled workflows can fail due to DNAnexus platform limits on the total size of the input and output JSON documents of a job. An example is a task with many inputs/outputs that is called in scatter over a large collection. In such a case, you can enable manifest support at compile time with the `-useManifests` option. This option causes each generated applet or workflow to accept inputs as an array of manifests, and to produce outputs as a single manifest.
```

It's a minor thing but it's easier to read (now and in the future) if there are no newlines introduced.

Reviewer 2: Here and below wherever the breakline is added.

Author: Actually, this new line here looks ugly to show the difference in versions. In the raw source it looks fine and there's no change in the rendered variant. But without this break line - the source looks like one stretched line and you have to scroll sidewise to read it. So I would really insist on having those break lines in the markdown docs from now on.

Author: This is how it looks now: https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/455de1d4d71bebc2261d2702d2a6ea3e477a1c4c/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L1444

This is how the rest of the doc looks without new lines:
https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/455de1d4d71bebc2261d2702d2a6ea3e477a1c4c/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L1296

To me second example is harder to read compared to my version

Author: please click the links to actually see it in the raw .md

A manifest is a JSON document that contains all the inputs/outputs that would otherwise be passed directly to/from the 
workflow stage. A manifest can be specified in one of two ways: 
1. A `.json` input file (see [Manifest JSON](#manifest-json)) is the recommended way to provide inputs in the manifest format.  
`java -jar dxCompiler.jar -inputs mymanifest.json` will produce `mymanifest.dx.json` that can be passed to `dx run -f mymanifest.dx.json`.

> This is the recommended way to provide inputs in manifest format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```
(as we say it above)

> 2. A platform `file-xxx` with content described in  [Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs](#intermediate-manifest-file-inputs/outputs) 

Reviewer 2: It seems that this links is broken

Author: Thanks for catching - at some point a bunch of changes stacked from all the suggestions in the GH web app. Reverted to the intended version

Author: renamed to avoid slash in [4402b17](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/354/commits/4402b174de30c14aba71f257715a1c2f3feabac5)

section can be used to pass manifest output from a stage of one workflow (including the `output` stage) as input to another workflow.  A 
typical use case for this scenario is when a user wants to pass manifest output file from a stage (including `output` stage) 
directly to a new workflow. Also, this scenario might be useful when debugging individual stages of a failing workflow.

## Manifest JSON

> When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_manifest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it 
> For example, given the following workflow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When manifest support is enabled, each applet has an `input_manifest___` input field of type `hash`, which means that it accepts a JSON document as a string. For example, given the following workflow:
```

Seems that a sentence was cut midway here so I added the rest back :)

Author: Thanks for catching - at some point a bunch of changes stacked from all the suggestions in the GH web app. Reverted to the intended version

workflow stage. A manifest can be specified in one of two ways: 
1. A `.json` input file (see [Manifest JSON](#manifest-json)) is the recommended way to provide inputs in the manifest format.  
`java -jar dxCompiler.jar -inputs mymanifest.json` will produce `mymanifest.dx.json` that can be passed to `dx run -f mymanifest.dx.json`.
2. A platform `file-xxx` with content described in  [Intermediate manifest file inputs and outputs](#intermediate-manifest-file-inputs-and-outputs) 
section can be used to pass manifest output from a stage of one workflow (including the `output` stage) as input to another workflow.  A 
typical use case for this scenario is when a user wants to pass manifest output file from a stage (including `output` stage) 
directly to a new workflow. Also, this scenario might be useful when debugging individual stages of a failing workflow.

## Manifest JSON

> When manifest support is enabled, applet/workflow outputs which are passed from one stage to another (or to the final output

Reviewer 2: We don't want to inform the user of what the `input_manifest___` is?

Author: It's not as simple. It does have this field, as well as a bunch of others, which I could not find the documentation for. APPS-1309 ticket should address that.

Reviewer 2: Gotcha. Thanks!

}
```

When you compile the workflow, provide the manifest using the `-inputs` option, and it will be translated to:

> `mymanifest.dx.json`

Reviewer 2: How about leaving the title of the workflow above the snippet? Similarly to other snippets in this area of the doc.

Author: fixed in [34af2d0](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/354/commits/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f)[34af2d0](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/354/commits/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f)

```json
{
  "input_manifest___": {
    "encoded": false,
    "types": {
      "f": "File",
      "s": "String"
    },
    "values": {
      "s": "hello",
      "f": "dx://file-xxx"
    }
  }
}
```

The created `mymanifest.dx.json` should be used as an input file when running the workflow:
```commandline
dx run workflow-yyy -f mymanifest.dx.json
```

## Manifest file

> 

Reviewer 2: Here it says " Given the above workflow, the manifest output would be". Does that mean that a workflow compiled with `-useManifests` will always have an additional output added by the dxCompiler? If so, perhaps it's good to mention it in the intro section.

Also, in the `Manifest JSON` section we say that "each applet has an `input_mainfest___` input field of type `hash`". Perhaps, for symmetry, we could say something corresponding in `Manifest file`, with `input_manifest_files___` (since we mention it below but don't introduce anywhere at the beginning of this section).

Author: Fixed in [34af2d0](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/354/commits/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f)[34af2d0](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/354/commits/34af2d06912bb083b83ecf159a95c62e9e91a92f)

> will always have an additional output added by the dxCompiler?

Point 1 in the manifest intro.

> Perhaps, for symmetry, we could say something corresponding in Manifest file...

Added point 2 in the intro. Tried to separate these 2 cases more explicitly.

{
  "test.input_manifest___": {
    "s": "hello",

>     "f": "project-aaa:file-xxx"

Reviewer: do we accept `dx://` prefix in manifests?  The input files that are passed to dxCompiler for WDL and CWL do accept it (or do the require dx:// prefix?), so this inconsistency would be confusing.

Reviewer: why not specify input in the same format as for the non-manifest mode, and have dxCompiler handle the translation?  .

Author: `dx://` is not required (i.e. my manifests worked without it), but I can leave it in. 

The use of a fully qualified name here was to encourage using of the fully qualified names to avoid bugs reported in APPS-1269 and APPS-1270 (until those are fixed). Please see comments to APPS-1270 to get the context, but shortly I envision the necessity of a fully qualified name in cases when file form a different project is referenced. I'll revert for now. 
Of note, here's an example of fully qualified name in the doc: https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/e0e309241fc4092f929489b47f82918c2abc9fc0/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L93

Author: fixed in [57706e0](https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/354/commits/57706e08386e46961d18daae28391d2c836a3247)

      "f": "File",
      "s": "String"
    },
    "values": {
      "s": "hello",
      "f": "project-aaa:file-xxx"
    }
  }
}
```

The created `mymanifest.dx.json` should be used as an input file when running the workflow:
```commandline
dx run workflow-yyy -f mymanifest.dx.json
```

#### Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs

When manifest support is enabled, applet/workflow outputs which are passed from one stage to another (or to the final output 
stage) exist on the form of intermediate manifests. Here we describe the format of such an intermediary manifest for users to better 
understand the format. There is no need to use them as your workflow inputs, and JSON manifest above is the recommended way.

Given the above workflow, the manifest output from `common` stage to the next stage (not shown) would be:

```json
{
  "encoded": false,
  "id": "stage-common",
  "values": {
    "s": "hello",
    "f": "project-aaa:file-xxx"
  }
}
```

The `id` field represents the ID of the stage which created the manifest output. It is optional but will always be 
populated in the output manifests. The manifest may contain additional fields (`types` and `definitions`) that are only 

> for internal use and can be ignored.

Reviewer: does output stage produce a manfiest file?  Does user need to understand the format of the manifest file to interpret which output files correspond to which WDL workflow fields?

Author: Yes: https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/blob/deceb5969a512a847bb493bab77d8b6a0aa21fa4/doc/ExpertOptions.md?plain=1#L1447
Example:
`project-Fy9QqgQ0yzZbg9KXKP4Jz6Yqanalysis-GFBqG8j0yzZbjGyp159b46VK`. I elaborated further where the user should look for the outputs in the manifest file.

{

>   "test.input_manifest___": {

Reviewer: mymanifest.json accepts compact cromwell format.
```suggestion
{
 "test.s": "hello",
 "test.f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
}
```

Author: Are we deprecating the previous manifest format in the favor of cromwell?

Author: Suggestion rejected at the meeting 07/21

    "s": "hello",
    "f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
  }
}
```

Compile the workflow `test` from above with the `-inputs mymanifest.json` option. A new file `mymanifest.dx.json` will be 
created with the following content. **NOTE** `mymanifest.dx.json` is created by the compiler - the user does not need to 
create/change it manually.

`mymanifest.dx.json`
```json
{
  "input_manifest___": {
    "encoded": false,
    "types": {
      "f": "File",
      "s": "String"
    },
    "values": {
      "s": "hello",
      "f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
    }
  }
}
```

The created `mymanifest.dx.json` should be used as an input file when running the workflow:
```commandline
dx run workflow-yyy -f mymanifest.dx.json
```

#### Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs

When manifest support is enabled, applet/workflow outputs which are passed from one stage to another (or to the final output 

> stage) exist on the form of intermediate manifests. Here we describe the format of such an intermediary manifest for users to better 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stage) exist in the form of intermediate manifests. Here we describe the format of intermediate manifest for informational purposes only.
```

> understand the format. There is no need to use them as your workflow inputs, and JSON manifest above is the recommended way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no need to use them as your workflow inputs, as the JSON manifest above is the recommended format.
```

> Given the above workflow, the manifest output from `common` stage to the next stage (not shown) would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the above workflow, the manifest output from the `common` stage to the following stages (not shown) would be:
```

```json
{
  "encoded": false,
  "id": "stage-common",
  "values": {
    "s": "hello",
    "f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
  }
}
```

The `id` field represents the ID of the stage which created the manifest output. It is optional but will always be 

> populated in the output manifests. The manifest may contain additional fields (`types` and `definitions`) that are only 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
populated in the output manifests. The manifest may contain additional types` and `definitions` fields  that are only 
```

> for internal use and can be ignored. The actual outputs of the workflow are recorded in the output manifest under the attribute 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for internal use and can be ignored. The outputs of the workflow are referenced in the `values` field of the output manifest
```

> `values` in the form of a map, where keys are the names of the outputs specified in the workflow script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the form of a map, where keys are the names of the workflow outputs from the WDL `output` workflow section.
```

`mymanifest.dx.json`
```json
{
  "input_manifest___": {
    "encoded": false,
    "types": {
      "f": "File",
      "s": "String"
    },
    "values": {
      "s": "hello",
      "f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
    }
  }
}
```

The created `mymanifest.dx.json` should be used as an input file when running the workflow:
```commandline
dx run workflow-yyy -f mymanifest.dx.json
```

#### Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs

When manifest support is enabled, applet/workflow outputs which are passed from one stage to another (or to the final output 
stage) exist in the form of intermediate manifests. Here we describe the format of intermediate manifest for informational purposes only.
There is no need to use them as your workflow inputs, as the JSON manifest above is the recommended format.

Given the above workflow, the manifest output from the `common` stage to the following stages (not shown) would be:

```json
{
  "encoded": false,
  "id": "stage-common",
  "values": {
    "s": "hello",
    "f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
  }
}
```

The `id` field represents the ID of the stage which created the manifest output. It is optional but will always be 

> populated in the output manifests. The manifest may contain additional types` and `definitions` fields  that are only 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
populated in the output manifests. The manifest may contain additional `types` and `definitions` fields  that are only 
```

dx run workflow-yyy -f mymanifest.dx.json
```

#### Intermediate manifest file inputs/outputs

When manifest support is enabled, applet/workflow outputs which are passed from one stage to another (or to the final output 
stage) exist in the form of intermediate manifests. Here we describe the format of intermediate manifest for informational purposes only.
There is no need to use them as your workflow inputs, as the JSON manifest above is the recommended format.

Given the above workflow, the manifest output from the `common` stage to the following stages (not shown) would be:

```json
{
  "encoded": false,
  "id": "stage-common",
  "values": {
    "s": "hello",
    "f": "dx://project-aaa:file-xxx"
  }
}
```

The `id` field represents the ID of the stage which created the manifest output. It is optional but will always be 
populated in the output manifests. The manifest may contain additional types` and `definitions` fields  that are only 
for internal use and can be ignored. The outputs of the workflow are referenced in the `values` field of the output manifest
in the form of a map, where keys are the names of the workflow outputs from the WDL `output` workflow section.

> To specify a manifest output file as input to an applet or workflow, first upload the file to the platform and then pass 

Reviewer: please delete 3 lines as below as they did not work in my simple test.
